hello welcome to the ipfs weekly call
for the 23rd of September 2019 I am a
teen brain I will be your host today
we're gonna do the usual stuff so we
have any community announcements that
are in the agenda which I just pasted in
the chat so probably none just put it in
the chat and then P von Hardenberg from
you can switch is going to tell us all
about the cool stuff that that they're
building in the sort of art science
thinking and yeah using what's the
future tech distributed web technology
cool so can I get a note-taker please
thanks are they
does anybody have any announcements
Molly lightning speeds I ran out of time
for anyone who's going to be me in Japan
for Def Con that's on October 7th we're
having an IP FS community meetup hosted
by the Japan protocol chapter in Osaka
and on the 12th which is a Saturday we
are going to have a meet-up in Tokyo for
anyone who's there and so actually
whether or not you're in town if you're
in if you are in Japan please please
come in and join your friendly local IP
FS humans for some fun talks and
workshops and delicious snacks sushi and
matcha and other tasty things so if
you're around please come hang out
cool no other announcements great Pete
take it away all right well thanks very
much for having me here just kept my
slides up on screen so okay no okay
how's that look everybody can see my I
can switch logo show him great pardon me
hmm so yeah thanks for inviting me my
name is Peter van Hardenberg I'm a
principal investigator with the Incans
witch research labs we're an industrial
research lab motivated by the idea that
computers in computing are failing
thinkers and creators and that we have
moved to a consumptive mode of computing
I'm not going to say too much about that
because this is perhaps a little farther
afield from the interest of most of the
people on the IVFs call but put briefly
it's telling that the MacBook Pro no
longer has an escape key which is of
course vital to you know a great many
professional software developers who use
VI the iPad which originally kind of had
this promise of being this incredible
creative environment for me and for most
people I think you'll find the iPad is
is most frequently used as a Netflix
device and we see of course that you
know all of our computing platforms
including the computing platform we
spend most of our time with the phone
are sort of organized around an
attentional metaphor that that the value
of a software that software authors can
create is tied to how much of your time
they can get you to spend looking at
that device and so we have these kind of
perverse incentives in our technology
stack that cause us to spend our time
being distracted and being consumptive
instead of being concentrated and
focused and creative and so throughout
all of the different sort of
acts of research at the lab we've been
exploring these problems from a sort of
technical but also philosophical
perspective and trying to understand
what we can do to to change that so I'm
going to talk a little bit about one of
those tracks that is we call local first
software you may have heard of offline
first software the idea behind offline
for a software is that your software
work offline first and we kind of we
think that's very very reasonable but we
kind of extended it a little bit further
and added a few more requirements and
begin by kind of asking a question you
know who owns your data now it's it's
very popular today to pick on big cloud
vendors like Google for owning your data
right and if they can you know shut down
a service and take it away was it really
yours but it's more than more than just
you know sort of privacy or sort of
corporate surveillance paranoia which I
think are perfectly reasonable but you
know if you own your data do you have it
on your device do you worry about you
know the startup who makes the software
going out of business if it's your data
can you choose what programs it works
with do you decide how it gets shared if
it's shared with advertisers and so on
these are all different kind of
pressures on it and you know the the
number one thing that kind of motivated
me to worry about this was I got really
tired of all the incredible journeys
that my data was going on without me
you know we keep having these sort of
blog posts about what an incredible
journey it's been to build some startup
or some product but now that journey has
come to an end and with it so has my use
of the software meanwhile George Martin
who writes The Game of Thrones novels
continues to peck out the latest Game of
Thrones novel on an ancient IBM PC
running word star 4.0 under ms-dos you
know that that ownership that deep
longevity is not something that's
available to us today so gonna outline
seven kind of principles of local first
software and then I'll talk a little bit
about how how we build local for
software at the lab so first and I think
it's important that we put this first is
the software fast our research and sorry
I shouldn't say our research we have
found and by surveying the existing
research that people grossly
and radically undervalued performance in
software and that you know running at 60
frames a second loading in 100
milliseconds these kinds of things make
huge huge differences to the lived
experience of consuming software and you
know fundamentally we believe that local
first software has the ability to be
faster than any other kind of software
because if the data is already there on
your computer you don't have to wait for
it to go to Ashburn Virginia you know to
fetch packets over the network before
you can start showing results you know
you know next frame or your money back
has been sort of a rallying cry for us
but it's quite difficult to achieve
today another question you know about
local for software is you know can you
actually use the software on all your
devices is this software trapped inside
you know a single computer is your data
trapped in a computer is it stuck on
your phone is it you know obviously for
software to be useful your data has to
be available where you are and that
means being available on all your
devices of course it's not your data if
you can't get to it when you're in an
airplane or in a train or in my house
just standing kind of near the
refrigerator super frustrating
we believe that humans are a
collaborative species and that software
which doesn't support collaboration
where appropriate is just kind of broken
out of the box we talked a little bit
about the incredible journey problem you
know will this software have longevity
will it live a long time are you kind of
you know can you trust the software to
do your most important creative work of
your life you know if you begin writing
a novel would you use this software or
would you worry that before the novel
was done but the company would have
pivoted or gone out of business or you
know sunsetted that software obviously
privacy and security are concerns
everywhere but particularly when we're
talking about our creative work it's
just not comfortable to feel that
strangers or other people might be
accessing your work without your
knowledge and last sort of talking about
data control and ownership this little
bit of a umbrella concept but if someone
else can delete the data it's not your
data if you can't choose where it is or
how
works or whether you write to it it's
not your data you know a concrete
example here that we talked about a lot
is this idea of you know people keep
trying to invent sort of right
protection for decentralized systems and
I think that's sort of fundamentally
misguided because if the data is on my
computer and I can't write to it then
it's not my data it's somebody else's
data you know if someone else can revoke
my access to the data it's not my data
and we believe very strongly that that
the things on your computer should be
yours and then it's disempowering and
destructive of user agency to to take
that away okay so that's you know a
brief philosophical tour I'll happily
answer questions about it towards the
end but I want to talk about some of our
experiments in actually building local
for software briefly so first a caveat
browsers are not local first I know
that's probably not a surprise to anyone
on the call but it's really amazing just
how hostile browsers are to the idea of
not having a network connection and
that's despite really good work from
people like Frances and Alex Russell to
you know work on PW A's and so on you
know browsers delete your data you know
it's your data I've tried to open up
something that I had a PWA I hadn't used
in a few months and it just wasn't there
anymore
I relied on that I trusted it and I went
to load it and it was gone because I
don't know why browsers just don't don't
keep data locally they're not built that
way
as of course everybody on this call
knows browsers don't support all the
things that we need to do peer-to-peer
networking and you know fundamentally
you just can't use your browser in an
airplane I can't tell you the number of
times I've sort of tabbed to something
in my browser and then you know I see it
for like two frames and then the browser
goes to refresh and pull the data it's
gone super frustrating but maybe in a
place where I would sort of leave from
the ipfs position I also think that the
Dayman solution is is not viable asking
a user to install a daemon on their
computer is you know one just sort of
practically I think that's I would call
that adoption poison your ability to
convince people to use your software if
they have to install two things and one
of them is a
thing that runs in the background is
quite low and I think just that
conceptually the idea of having these
sort of spooky action at a distance of
things running in the background behind
your computers is kind of I say user
hostile but what I really mean is sort
of user experience hostile it's very
hard to provide a really high quality
user experience and sure you can work on
your trap all you want make that as nice
as you like but it's it's fundamentally
now you have two things and one of them
is this weird mysterious thing that
requires all this explanation I just
want to open the software and have the
software and yes of course I've talked
to ipfs people about this before and
they say oh well in the beautiful future
you know every OS will have ipfs built
into it that's nice but you don't get to
live in that future if that you can't
solve problems today and I don't really
see how that path converges with the
current course and speed okay so well
Bowser's out what are we gonna do
yeah it's electron I hate electron as
much as anyone else who uses an electron
on a daily basis however I had written a
lot of software in a lot of ways and at
this point I'm just used to it electron
is a pretty great solution for building
a cross-platform software and not only
that it allows you to access the wealth
of skills and creative innovation that's
going on in the browser development
space but without tying yourself to the
network so oK you've suffered long
enough through me just sort of yammering
on about philosophical principles let's
look at some screenshots and talk about
actual projects we've done this first
project I'm showing here was one of our
early projects it's called pixel pusher
so pixel pusher was an experiment in
basically taking some of our local first
principles and bringing them to life by
modifying an existing react app I'll
have a link to the blog posts of some of
these things at the end so you can check
it out in more detail but what you see
here is we took somebody's basic pixel
art editor built with react and we
bolted a sort of a distribution system
underneath it based on C R DT we've more
working on
Clutton called Auto March and so what
you see on the right here is a little
map of different versions of this
software you can see this one maybe has
some shading on the pixels a little
differing this is kind of chunky yes
maybe a little too small fine details of
sometimes a different gray background
and what happens is that you can create
Forks and then merge them back up so you
can basically sort of dynamically
collaborate with people in this case is
only a single user working on each of
these that's the sort of green rectangle
but you can imagine and indeed when we
were working on the project we would
create all these sort of wild variations
of images and then you can mix and match
anything and merge anything together
with anything else and because we've
built around a causally ordered CR dt
conflict-free replicated data type we
can detect anytime to users that edited
the same pixel and provide really
intelligent conflict resolution a later
project we worked on
here's pushpin this is an earlier
version of pushpin I can show life
people are interested later what looks
like today but pushpin is sort of cards
on a canvas there's a number of products
based around these ideas but again the
idea here was exploring what does
collaboration look like in a more user
friendly kind of way and so while yes
you can see the sort of cards on a
canvas here a lot of the magic is in the
title bar at the top where we were
exploring questions about you know what
does it mean to meet another user how do
you track identity and presence and so
you can see for example here there's a
little green ring around Adams avatar
and that means that he's online and he's
broadcasting on a pubsub channel a
little sort of heartbeat so because I
know him I can see that he's online if
he selected some of these cards I would
see his selection state more that later
we've done a number of other projects
including capstone which we wrote pretty
extensively about published which was
built as a Google app Google apps are a
bit like electron apps
I'm currently calling you from a pixel
book the Google app was interesting to
us because it allowed us to harness kind
of browser technology JavaScript
technology but it had access to real
networking's
that effort was ultimately less
successful than we had hoped and I think
a lot of the difficulty there came from
abandonment is too strong word perhaps
but I think it would be fair to say that
Google is not actively investing in that
stack anymore and they're quite
transparent about this this wasn't a
surprise but also just although many of
the api's and interfaces are essentially
you know sit just as with node they're
essentially JavaScript wrappers around
deep system libraries there was enough
kind of like local inflection that I
made actually using existing
technologies from the node ecosystem on
the Google apps ecosystem quite fraught
with like subtle bugs that took off
sometimes long times to run down so that
was ultimately my advice is don't pick
Google Apps not that Google would tell
you to for your projects and then we
also built one called farm which I don't
have any screenshots of sadly but it was
a really interesting experiment where we
basically paired a CR DT document that
could change over time collaboratively
to code for a web component written in
the elm programming language that was
also itself OCR DT is we had this really
cool kind of environment where you could
remix apps and I could share a link with
you and then you'd open it up and you
download all the code and all the data
to see what I saw and then we could both
both edit the software or the data about
using the software together that's a lot
of fun but ultimately quite challenging
to sort of rationalize for the user so I
want to talk a little bit briefly now
having built we've been at this almost
three years building various research
projects and experiments I want to talk
about the things that I see as working
in the things that I see is not working
so things that are working really well
include because I think this notion of
standalone software is something that I
would like to see more people
internalized it's amazing to work on a
piece of software and that's it
to sound silly but you know having been
a web person for a long time you kind of
have this like tripartite world where
there's always a data stack an API stack
and then it front-end stack and then you
have to deploy it afterwards and it's
just so incredible and empowering to you
know have a piece of software and to
work on it and to use it and it works
and you're done you know if it works on
your machine that's literally it that
somebody else's machine is probably
going to have the same behavior there's
no you know separate deploy step there's
no separate you know platform that's
different you don't have a migration to
run and prod you know your computer is
where the software's kalypso if it works
it works we've been very pleasantly
surprised by just how well CRD t's work
in terms of ordering and collaborating
on data specifically the CR dt we work
on is something called Auto merge
there's lots of stuff written about it
out there Americans always out talking
about it but Auto merge is a sort of a
JSON like CR DT which is to say it's a
series of lists and maps that can nest
together sort of arbitrarily with values
in them and that models a lot of data
use cases really well so I that's
surprisingly good we were really worried
about sort of conflict resolution and
the challenges of like making you know
dealing with things arriving in
different orders from different users
and people creating problems and in
pixel pusher we did a bunch of work
around you eyes for that but really
surprisingly for us working on later
projects we discovered that for the most
part while conflicts can occur humans
seem to have relatively strong innate
collaboration sort of intuitions and so
don't create problems for each other
that was a big surprise positively and
also the sort of functional reactive
programming model that react the Elm
kind of model is a really good fit for
decentralized systems because you have a
very clear separation between the data
the transform function hardening
the data the transformation of the data
to a UI and then events coming back from
that UI into the data which maps really
well on to an environment where your
data could be updated either locally or
by any remote user so that's all good
things that suck basically NAT traversal
is a super big problem this is no
surprise to anyone here but we'll talk
more about particularly where my worry
is their mobile support is quite dire
and it worries me that I don't see much
recognition of how bad it is doing a
good job of mobile support is not like
getting this stuff working on react
native doing a good job with mobile
support means understanding how mobile
environments are fundamentally different
and by that I mean radios and battery
and that means like if you're going to
run this stuff on a mobile device you
need to take advantage of when the radio
is on or off you need to worry about not
draining the battery by doing things in
the background there's so much subtlety
and important research that needs to be
done there and I don't see it happening
and if anybody is doing it out there I
don't mean any insult by it it's
possible I don't I haven't seen your
work if this world of software is going
to be successful there needs to be a
business model for people to build
software against it I do not think that
let's just call it like positive
externalities of icos is a sustainable
funding model I think that if you
attract people chasing that you will not
get the best developers or the best work
I think that ultimately every sort of
generation of software needs to find a
viable business model and but the trap
that needs to be avoided here is what I
would call kind of like the open source
consumer software problem like
OpenOffice sucks the UI is terrible
it was never competitive with what's
best in the
and I think a lot of that is because the
best designers and people from that
community were always alienated by
open-source software and open-source
culture and so we never really got great
UI is built in the open source world I
hope that this world can someday be the
best way not just to make software but
also the best way to make a living and
because you don't give up control over
your creations and you don't need a
giant team to get things done so
hopefully that can be the case also just
broadly performance is a huge issue in
the web stack running things at 60
frames a second which we talked about
the importance of earlier is really
really hard
borderline impossible and I've had lots
of deep conversations like chrome team
people about this stuff and they're
basically like yeah it's it's hard and
in our particular case I think a lot of
the focus in the community early was
around like anti censorship or sharing a
scientific data these kinds of things so
there hasn't been a lot of you can do
privacy sure you can encrypt your blobs
before you share them with them that
creates new problems they're just
talking briefly about the net reversal
issue this is kind of the worst case
from that traversal which is that you
are at a coffee shop with your
collaborator a very common case in a
coffee shop is that the router will be
configured with sort of guest network
access which means that mdns or all
local kind of an you to me traffic is
blocked so of course then you go out and
you say okay well we'll do a sort of
loopback natura tour so we'll do this
you know I'll connect up through the
internet and back but the router sees
that traffic and goes huh this is this
isn't right why would I want to make the
loopback
NAT traversal to myself that's crazy so
it drops that and the result is that
there's just no way for you and me to
connect if we're in the same room on the
same Wi-Fi if one of us jumps onto our
phone connection everything's fine but
unfortunately it's not just in coffee
shops that this happens it's also in air
B&B x' it's at universities and it's in
company networks and so I don't see
anyone with a solution to this problem I
think broadly the
most credible solution I've seen is is
something like stun return you know kind
of having proxy nodes out in the network
but that's really fragile that kind of
fails the longevity test which is that
if you know all of this traffic has to
be routed by like a benevolent corporate
benefactor that's operating a service in
the hope of maintaining the reliability
of the network then that only works as
long as they feel like paying to do that
and that's not sustainable so I hope
somebody will work on that we've built
all our stuff on top of that that is a
lot like ipfs if you're not familiar
with it it's a another peer-to-peer data
sharing stack and with that rather than
having the addresses of content being
the hash of the content the address of
content is a public key that signs the
content and then each block in the
content is signed with the hash of the
previous content so you can create a
nice consistent depend on the log system
with sort of the robust self checking
which is quite cool
I know there are supposed to be ways to
emulate this using IP NS and I feel T
but the performance of doing all of
those lookups it makes it completely
impossible for the kind of real-time
collaboration that we do I'd be
interested in looking more at that and
my last kind of point for the IP ifs
project is that I think pinning is like
totally the wrong frame to think about
data through I remember at an Internet
Archive meetup somebody pointed out that
all the data that we're exposed to
accept streaming video in a year can be
put onto a single you know micro SD card
the size of our pinky finger now I think
we should always pin every piece of data
that we touch I think that should be the
default and we could consider sort of
ways to relieve pressure if that was a
problem but it's kind of the wrong
metaphor and I think it's created so
much churn in terms of like people doing
all kinds of complicated incorrect
things to try and solve these problems
both at the user experience level but
also at the technical level to try and
work around this and last very briefly I
think I'm well over time here so I'll
speak quite shortly about this
think you know as we move up the stack
into end user experiences we're
encountering a whole new universe of
user experience challenges so it's one
thing to say oh this person is present
or not but why am I not able to connect
to you are you seeing what I'm seeing
you know are we in sync are we out of
sync how can I tell do I have a
connection to you locally on our local
Wi-Fi that we're in an airplane at
30,000 feet but not beyond there if you
know we talked early about right
permission if I'm writing to a thing but
no one else will care because it's sort
of read-only well I should still be able
to do what I want with the data on my
computer maybe I want to scribble in a
on your contact document that says oh I
met this person that offline camp but
that's not really something that we have
the mental framework or the user sort of
experiences to communicate or talk about
so I think there's a lot of really
interesting UX work further up the stack
that needs doing and we've been
exploring that Thanks
I could talk for a long time about the
stuff I talk properly for a little tooth
already but you can read a lot more
we've written a lot more and we have
lots more that we have done and not
written about so feel free to reach out
if you have questions or would like to
give feedback or anything else you can
contact me at PPHN you can switch comm
or on Twitter as pph and if you're
coming to offline camp I'll be there
this weekend ocz wow that was great
you know some people might have to drop
off to go to their meetings but if
anyone wants to stick around and this
time some Q&A
what what is next for you can switch
well we have a number of projects going
on right now at the moment there's a
team working on pushpin we're interested
in taking it from a research prototype
to something that users can really use
we think that the next sort of step in
the maturation of this space is actually
putting something into end-user hands
there's a lot of work to do
but we're sort of making progress on
that synchronization status is something
that we're working on this week which is
ok grades you know we've shared data
we're connected but like can I see what
you see how do I know if you're offline
how do I know where you were last if I
have the same program on my desktop and
my laptop you know am I caught up in my
head am i behind how how do you think
about all of this how do you communicate
all of this and how do you do it without
creating like a giant spreadsheet of
vector flocks so those are UI problems
were working on today literally yeah I
think it's I think that's kind of really
interesting stuff is one of the UX of
these distributed applications because
everything seems to be like the kind of
you know such and such like that uber of
such and such is like the or thing but
distributed it's like ooh a lot of
really deep and important work that you
have to work forward from first
principles to achieve and just trying to
port Google Docs to run like on the
blockchain is like bluntly I think it's
shallow and lazy and doesn't actually
lead to anywhere interesting okay I
would do want to hear more about the IP
LD queries because like I'm I'm part of
the IP LD team but we can really take
this line if you want so yeah I mean I
speak very briefly to the motivation
here our CRT T's are built out of long
chains of individual operations by
actors so my machine I'm calling you
from might be one my other laptop might
be one your laptop might be one and each
node produces a chain of work that then
you need to sort of you feed all that
into a box you shake it and then a
document pops out this is not rocket
science but
because each operation refers to all the
previous operations that all need to be
resolved before you can render the
document it's extremely tedious and
expensive to walk all the way back
through like an IPSS chain goes Allah by
the way has been looking at some of this
so you may have heard some of these
things from him he's been looking at out
on urgent our work for awhile so it's
possible you've already got some of
these versions of it but the extra
challenge is that I also would like to
be able to have storage nodes that I
don't trust with the contents of the
data I don't want to have to upload
unencrypted versions of my data in order
for this sort of traversal to work which
means that there needs to be some kind
of structure around this but even more
concerning Lee you can learn all awful
lot about a person and what they're
doing even just by watching the
structure in the stream of this traffic
and so I have I'm not sure what the
answer here is in terms of how to
distribute these kind of flows of data
without creating these like really
privacy violating side channels I think
the scuttlebutt approach of building
sort of like fat logs that have a lot of
data in them and then sort of D mixing
them in clients is interesting but that
has all kinds of performance problems so
I think there's a lot of like we can
make small improvements on the technical
problem and that's good and necessary
just the ability to query like a whole
linked list and a single query would be
nice but I think that there's quite a
bit more work to do past that madam I'm
not sure what the state of the research
is there yeah let me quickly quickly as
say that we have a new thing called
and I peeled these selectors which is
exactly this so you can basically then
query yeah chains of things or complete
trees and it's currently in mostly in
the spec repository but there's a
JavaScript implementation for it these
days no no so it's on the iPad I told
you repository so it's github / IP LD /
specs for the specific I know ones
what's the implementation and so it's
only a go implementation so far I think
that's one
yeah I will I will post a link I have to
find it myself okay
and then there's also what we are also
truly work on is IP LD schemas and this
kind of is related to you can kind of
define the structure of your data in the
schema but it would then be kind of
independent of your blocks so you can
kind of have for your application you
would still have the kind of like link
stuff and blocks but what do expose
might be I squash it into a single block
for example then ends up with you might
be able to hide such things as you were
talking about that you might like leak
information about the spider and so on
but it's like yeah just give you some
inspiration the links and yeah super
interesting I'm gonna take a closer look
at it things yeah cool okay hey thanks
very much for talking to us today
yeah it's been an absolute pleasure it's
been super interesting you know stop
recording in a second but thank you very
much
and now yeah we'll see on the internet
or next week the weekly cool thank you